He is famously the object
and not the subject of a Bible account.
We easily sympathize with him
because we can understand
his emotions and feelings at the time.
Yet, his response
is that which provides a powerful life lesson
in our service to God.
We’re introduced to him
in the book of Mark chapter 14
—Mark chapter 14, beginning in verse 50.
Verse 50 picks up the account
of Jesus in the garden of Gethsemane.
And we read of the 11 faithful apostles:
“And they all abandoned him and fled.
“However, a certain young man
“wearing only a fine linen garment
over his naked body
“began to follow him nearby,
“and they tried to seize him,
but he left his linen garment behind
and got away naked.”
The young man in this verse
is understood to be John Mark,
and notice John Mark’s outstanding quality.
When the apostles all fled,
it says John Mark followed “nearby.”
What tremendous courage of this young man!
While the great men, the apostles, fled,
Mark stayed and he followed nearby.
Now, interestingly,
we know that Peter eventually also followed.
But notice this about Peter in verse 54:
“But Peter, from a good distance, followed.”
John Mark followed nearby.
In this we see
not only the courage of John Mark,
but we also see his devotion to Jesus.
To what extent he knew Jesus
or had interactions with Jesus,
we don’t know.
But he did have some.
And his devotion and courage for his Master
is unquestionable here.
The Scriptures also describe Mark, John Mark,
as “a strengthening aid”
and “a great comfort.”
Those were the observations of him
later in his life.
And we do know from the Scriptures
that John Mark
worked in the background
for some very big personalities
—the apostle Paul, the apostle Peter,
and Barnabas.
John Mark initially caught the attention
of the apostles
—of Paul and Barnabas—
when he was in Jerusalem.
Paul, or Saul at the time, and Barnabas
came there in 46 C.E.
And they took John Mark with them
to the exciting assignment of Antioch,
where Christianity was beginning to flourish,
and John Mark was brought along with them.
Later, in the year 47 C.E.,
John Mark was selected
to go with Barnabas and Saul
on the first missionary tour.
It’s described for us
in the book of Acts chapter 13.
At Acts 13:4, 5, it says:
“So these men [that is, Barnabas and Saul],
“sent out by the holy spirit,
went down to Seleucia,
“and from there they sailed away to Cyprus.
“When they arrived in Salamis,
they began proclaiming the word of God
“in the synagogues of the Jews.
They also had John as an attendant.”
John Mark
—he is described here as “an attendant.”
The footnote says “an assistant.”
The writer of Acts used
a very interesting word here for “attendant,”
and it’s a Greek word that literally means
“an under-rower.”
An under-rower was a man
who worked below the decks
on a large Roman naval vessel.
He would be below deck,
he would have to row in unison
(in cooperation) with his fellow rowers,
and he would have to follow the pace
set by the captain.
Why would this term be used
for John Mark in this instance?
Well, a clue comes from verse 4,
where it says:
“They sailed away to Cyprus.”
So the metaphor of an under-rower
now takes on greater meaning.
Incidentally, the same term
is used by the apostle Paul
when he refers to himself
as a servant of God,
or an attendant, in 1 Corinthians chapter 4.
Why would that be significant?
Why use it in 1 Corinthians?
Because in one of the bays next to Corinth,
the large ships of the Roman navy
took port there.
And so, again, the metaphor
of the under-rower
would take on great meaning.
Well, the infamous event
occurred in Acts chapter 15
—the event John Mark was an object of.
Notice in Acts chapter 15,
beginning in verse 37, it says:
“Barnabas was determined
to take along John, who was called Mark.
“Paul, however, was not in favor
of taking him along with them,
“seeing that he had departed
from them in Pamphylia
“and had not gone with them to the work.
“At this there was a sharp burst of anger,
“so that they separated from each other;
and Barnabas took Mark along
and sailed away to Cyprus.”
Denied an opportunity, denied a privilege,
what does Mark do?
It says he “sailed away
[with Barnabas] to Cyprus.”
Mark kept active in Jehovah’s service.
How does he do that?
John Mark was not so concerned
about a lost privilege
that he failed to appreciate
the opportunities that were in front of him.
Well, while he’s sailing away and working,
what’s Paul doing?
Verse 40 says: “Paul selected Silas.”
Verse 41 says:
“He went through Syria and Cilicia,
strengthening the congregations.”
Now, as you carry on in chapter 16,
we find him arriving
in Derbe and Lystra,
and verse 1 says
he met Timothy, a disciple.
In verse 3, what happens?
Paul expressed a desire
for Timothy to join him
—Mark’s replacement.
Interestingly, as Paul now begins
to travel with Timothy,
we find that the apostle Paul writes
to the Thessalonians within a year.
And at 1 Thessalonians 1:1,
Paul’s greeting is
from Paul, Silas, and Timothy.
Second Thessalonians too is
I wonder how Mark is feeling at this point.
Five years later,
he writes to the Corinthians.
And, again,
now it’s from Paul and Timothy.
During all this time,
where Timothy is rising, what’s Mark doing?
He’s rowing.
Mark is continually,
faithfully serving Jehovah.
Eleven years later,
in the years 60 C.E. to 61 C.E.,
when Paul was in Rome, who was with him?
John Mark.
And when Paul
wrote letters to various congregations,
he describes John Mark.
In fact, in one of the letters
in sending greetings (this is in Colossians),
he makes reference to the fact
that he had wanted to send John Mark
as a personal representative
to the congregations.
And that indicates to us
what kind of man Mark was
and what reputation he had.
A personal representative
was someone who was deeply trusted,
and he would have to represent Paul
before the congregations that he would visit.
That is the reputation of John Mark.
You know, there’s no record in the Scriptures
of the challenges
that John Mark faced in his ministry.
There are no shipwrecks, no beatings,
no hunger, no left-for-dead for John Mark.
But there is one challenge that he faced
that is shared with us.
And that is his difficulty, or the challenge,
with the apostle Paul—his brother.
And yet, clearly, there were no hard feelings
between these two men,
even though there was a difference.
In fact,
in Paul’s final words chronologically
in the book of 2 Timothy chapter 4
in reference to John Mark,
he tells Timothy: ‘Bring Mark.
He is helpful’
—the under-rower, John Mark.
Interestingly,
for all that we know about Timothy,
there are no words recorded
of Timothy’s in the Scriptures.
And yet, John Mark wrote a Gospel.
And as a typical under-rower,
he never mentioned his name.
So when we put the pieces together
of what is shared
of John Mark in the Scriptures,
we get a portrait of a man
who was (1) zealous for promoting
the good news in the worldwide field
and (2) happy to serve others.
This alone is worthy of our imitation.
But there is more.
In your future, you may be the object
caught up in a Paul-and-Barnabas moment.
You may face changed circumstances
because of health or family issues.
You may be the one who has to work
in the shadow of a Timothy.
A door may close for you
or be closed for you.
But like Mark, do not be so concerned
about lost privileges
that you fail to appreciate the opportunities
that are right in front of you.
May you, like Mark,
keep your heart
and your hands strong.
Keep them on the oars.
Work in unison.
Cooperate with your brothers and sisters
for the Master.
May you, like Mark, be the under-rower.